---
layout: post
category : programming 
tags : [javascript, functional programming, tutorial]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

This post compares currying in JavaScript, a functional object
oriented language and in Standard ML, a purely functional language
with the hopes of explaining how this techique is useful. 

## Prelude
A few weeks ago at Hacker School, a conversation started around currying. Some of us, who'd recently taken Dan Grossman's Programming Languages course built up a good mental model for the technique, Partial Application, that languages like Standard ML and OCaml make natural. I noted that Curried functions are possible in JavaScript, which caused a bit of confusion as well as debate as to whether it is a useful pattern in JavaScript, which it certainly is. 

## Overview
In Standard ML a Curried function is one that feeds into another for eventual execution. So, instead of accepting a tuple of arguments, i.e. <code> function add (x,y) {return x + y;}</code> we end up with something more like <code> fun add x y = x + y; </code>. If you're a JavaScript programmer you may be scratching your head over the comparison to Standard ML. Essentially, the code says to pass the parameters from one function to the next where at they are finally executed. This pattern is executed from left to right. 

In JavaScript Currying can be a nice way to do function delegation and <code>.bind</code> helps by delegating function arguments. Underscore.js, is a popular library loaded with quite a few functional tid bits and , <code> _.take, _.map, _.foldl </code> are just a few.

## What is Currying? What's the point?

In Standard ML every function must accept one (and only one) parameter, i.e. functions defined with this syntax <code> fun add3(x,y,z) = x + y + z;</code> actually accept a parameter of type tuple. In other words, function parameters are not a syntactic construct of the language itself. 

For example:

	fun add x y = x + y; 
	
is syntactic sugar for
	
	val add = fn x => fn y => x + y;
	
A popular functial language like Clojure don't make much of currying because it has Variadic functions, which is when functions can take a variable number of arguments by default. 

#### Partial Application

Simply put, supplying fewer than the total number of arguments to a function is called Partial Application and only works you have Curried functions. 

	val list = fn x => fn y => fn z => x::y::z::[]; 
	val partial = list "watermelon" 
	val fruit = partial "orange" "lime"
    => val fruit = ["watermelon","apple","orange"] : string list

In JavaScript, this kind of behavior isn't natural. Here is an example of currying using <code>.bind</code> which conceals the threading of fuctions  with <code>.bind</code> as illustrated above. We must create a function fruitList to build a list, and create a new function with bind which delegates a new function with its arguments to <code>list</code>. 

	function list() {
		return Array.prototype.slice.call(arguments);
	}

	var partial = list.bind(undefined,"watermelon"); 
	var fruit = partial("orange", "lime"); 
	=> ["watermelon", "orange", "lime"];
	
Here, <code>partial</code> is a function with a fixed subset of necessary arguments, though, only passing <code>undefined</code> is legal. We must pass <code> null </code> or <code>undefinded</code> as a parameter in the bind statement so that the receiving function will be ignored. Underscore.js conceals this:

A similar example, pulled from the [underscore.js](http://underscorejs.org/#partial) docs:
	
	var add = function(a, b) { return a + b; };
	add5 = _.partial(add, 5);
	add5(10);

_.partial is defined as:

	_.partial = function(func) {
    	var args = slice.call(arguments, 1);
    	return function() {
      		return func.apply(this, args.concat(slice.call(arguments)));
    	};
  	};

In closing, while Currying we need expclicitly in JavaScript (functions accept more than one argument, and with similar librarys to undersscore we can do Variadic functions), we can see how useful the concept is especially when it comes to making use of Partial Application. 























